Title: Autonomous Unmanned Aircraft Systems for Enhanced Search and Rescue of Drowning Swimmers: Image-Based Localization and Mission Simulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18088v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 03:04:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
# Autonomous Unmanned Aircraft Systems for Enhanced Search and Rescue of Drowning Swimmers: Image-Based Localization and Mission Simulation 

## Sascha Emanuel Zell 1∗

## , Toni Schneidereit 2, Armin Fügenschuh 1,Michael Breuß 2 

> 1

Chair of Engineering Mathematics and Numerical Optimization Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus–Senftenberg Platz der Deutschen Einheit 1 03046 Cottbus, Germany  

> 2

Chair of Applied Mathematics Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus–Senftenberg Platz der Deutschen Einheit 1 03046 Cottbus, Germany 

Abstract 

Drowning is an omnipresent risk associated with any activity on or in the water, and rescuing a drowning person is particularly challenging because of the time pressure, making a short response time important. Further compli-cating water rescue are unsupervised and extensive swimming areas, precise localization of the target, and the transport of rescue personnel. Technical innovations can provide a remedy: We propose an Unmanned Aircraft Sys-tem (UAS), also known as a drone-in-a-box system, consisting of a fleet of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) allocated to purpose-built hangars near swimming areas. In an emergency, the UAS can be deployed in addition to Standard Rescue Operation (SRO) equipment to locate the distressed person early by performing a fully automated Search and Rescue (S&R) operation and dropping a flotation device. In this paper, we address automatically locat-ing distressed swimmers using the image-based object detection architecture You Only Look Once (YOLO). We present a dataset created for this applica-tion and outline the training process. We evaluate the performance of YOLO versions 3, 5, and 8 and architecture sizes (nano, extra-large) using Mean Average Precision (mAP) metrics mAP@.5 and mAP@.5:.95. Furthermore, we present two Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) approaches to simulate re-sponse times of SRO and UAS-based water rescue. This enables estimation of time savings relative to SRO when selecting the UAS configuration (type, number, and location of UAVs and hangars). Computational experiments for a test area in the Lusatian Lake District, Germany, show that UAS assistance 

> ∗

Corresponding author: Sascha.Zell@b-tu.de 

1 

> arXiv:2604.18088v1 [cs.CV] 20 Apr 2026 shortens response time. Even a small UAS with two hangars, each containing one UAV, reduces response time by a factor of five compared to SRO.
> Keywords: Water Rescue, Unmanned Aircraft System, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, Swim-mer Localization, You Only Look Once

# 1 Introduction 

Swimming is a popular recreational activity and, due to its positive effects on phys-ical and mental health, a recommended form of physical rehabilitation [1]. Despite its advantages, swimming and water sports in general also carry risks, especially drowning. Contrary to the prevalent misconception that drowning involves convul-sive, panicked movements, it is often a silent event in which victims try to conserve energy and keep their heads just above the surface of the water, which often pre-vents them from calling for help [2]. In unsupervised swimming areas, survival often depends on quick intervention of bystanders (usually non-professionals), whose reac-tions range from inaction to alerting Emergency Medical Services (EMS) to high-risk personal intervention [3]. While ocean beaches are typically supervised by profes-sional lifeguards, the situation differs in inland waters such as lakes and rivers. In Germany, around 90% of fatal drowning accidents occur in inland waters such as rivers, lakes, streams, ponds, and canals, rather than in coastal areas [4]. Super-vision by lifeguards in these areas is usually only provided by volunteers and only during peak times; many areas remain completely unguarded due to staff short-ages. Consequently, there is a need for scalable, technologically innovative solutions to enhance swimmer safety in unsupervised inland waters requiring none to little additional personnel. Existing swimmer safety enhancing inventions have been categorized into phys-ical barriers, swimmer detection devices, signaling devices, flotation devices, equip-ment for special water sports, devices for preventing drowning in home sanitary wares, devices for scuba diving and other miscellaneous devices [5]. The Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) presented in this study is primarily a device for detecting swimmers and providing flotation, with potential synergies with other categories listed above. This research was conducted as part of the interdisciplinary research project RescueFly , funded by the Federal Ministry of Transport, Germany, which involved developing and testing a prototype UAS for an inland water test area in the Lusatian Lake District in Eastern Germany [6]. The UAS consists of a fleet of 

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) , colloquially known as drones , which are stored in custom-built hangars near swimming areas in a drone-in-a-box configuration. In an emergency, victims can alert a control center themselves using smart watches or 

Wearable Health-Monitoring Systems (WHMSs) , or bystanders can do so via mobile phones or on-site emergency telephones installed as part of the project. In addition to the resources for Standard Rescue Operations (SROs) , the control center can dispatch the UAS to conduct an automated Search and Rescue (S&R) operation. Equipped with onboard sensors and self-inflating flotation devices, the UAVs can provide rapid support and bridge the therapy-free interval while lifeboats approach. 2Figure 1a shows BUDDY I , a prototype water rescue UAV manufactured by MINTMASTERS GmbH and equipped with an inflatable flotation device Restube 

[7], which was developed and tested as part of the RescueFly project. The project also deployed the UAV hangar dRack , shown in Figure 1b, manufactured by DELTA-Fluid Industrietechnik GmbH and additionally equipped with optical sensors, com-puting hardware, and algorithms for automated post-flight checks [8].             

> (a) Water rescue UAV prototype BUDDY I,equipped with a Restube [7], positioned on the take-off area of the UAV hangar. Photo: Björn-Steiger-Stiftung.
> (b) The RescueFly UAV hangar prototype, shown with open doors, equipped with a sin-gle UAV. Photo: Ralf Schuster, BTU Cottbus-Senftenberg.

Figure 1: A UAS consisting of water rescue UAV (left) and hangar (right). This paper is the second part of a two-part series. Part 1 introduced a Mixed-Integer Linear Program (MILP) for in-advance offline S&R flight planning of UAV swarms and another MILP for spatial UAS location-allocation optimization. In this second part, we extend that work by using the MILP results to run a Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) of UAS-based S&R operations. Another DES model enables the estimation of average SRO response times. Together, this forms an evalua-tion framework for the performance of different UAS configurations, quantifying the impact of additional resources on the response time. Furthermore, we present a real-time image-based swimmer localization approach, utilizing the You Only Look Once (YOLO) neural network architecture. Due to limited available training data, we in-troduce a new dataset enriched with synthetic images and compare the performance of several YOLO versions and architecture sizes. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews rele-vant literature on image-based swimmer detection and simulation of water rescue. Section 3 details the YOLO-based detection of distressed swimmers and Section 4 presents simulation frameworks for SRO- and UAV-based water rescue, respectively. Section 5 comprises a case study conducted in the Lusatian Lake District in Ger-many. Finally, Section 6 concludes with a summary, potential extensions, and future research directions. 32 Literature Review 

This section reviews the most relevant literature on two main topics: image-based detection approaches for S&R operations, and simulation-based approaches for UAV-based S&R, particularly focusing on water rescue. 

## 2.1 Image-based Detection of Distressed Swimmers 

Image-based detection of humans in S&R operations is impacted by several factors, including the availability and quality of training data, the categorization of human behaviors, and model robustness. Since most S&R operations involve humans, the collection and use of sensitive training data raises ethical and legal questions, es-pecially regarding data privacy. These considerations are particularly important in the European Union (EU) , where data protection regulations are stringent [9]. How-ever, a variety of datasets have already been created to support human detection in S&R context, such as VisDrone [10], SeaDronesSee [11], UMA-SAR [12], and SARD 

[13]. Frequently used detection frameworks for these tasks include variants of YOLO 

[14, 15], Single Shot Detectors (SSDs) [16] and Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks (R-CNNs) [17, 18]. Hasan et al. [19] introduced a dataset on human be-havior in swimming pool environments, combining above-water and underwater im-ages to support drowning detection research. The dataset includes three behavioral classes, swim, drown, and idle, with each image depicting only one person. All of the individuals recorded are male, between 18 and 21 years old, and predominantly of Middle Eastern ethnicity. The dataset comprises 47 above-water and 44 under-water videos with an average length of 57 minutes at 30 frames per second (FPS) .Finally, CNN-based methods were used for scene classification and human pose es-timation. Broyles et al. [20] introduced a multi-modal dataset for Wilderness Search and Rescue (WSAR) , consisting of 55,942 UAV-captured visual-thermal image pairs, covering various wilderness terrains, seasons, lighting conditions, and camera posi-tions, with participants being visible on trails, off trails and on dirt roads. Ages range from 11 to 70 years, but with a bias towards the 18 to 25 age group. Baseline detection results with YOLOv5 indicate that thermal images generally yield higher accuracy, mainly because of the environment. For example, in forested areas, the thermal representation of humans shows a high contrast to the surroundings. An-other UAV image dataset was introduced by Sambolek and Ivasic-Kos [21], featuring injured and exhausted humans in non-urban outdoor environments, recording nine actors aged 7 to 55 in different positions, both natural and staged, extracting a total of 1,981 images. Then, synthetic variants were created to simulate different weather conditions. These datasets and a modified subset of VisDrone (restricted to the per-son class) were used to train and evaluate deep neural networks including Cascade R-CNN , Faster R-CNN , RetinaNet and YOLOv4 , with YOLOv4 showing the best results. Martinez-Alpiste et al. [22] proposed a smartphone-compatible detection framework for UAV-based S&R operations, implementing a YOLOv3-tiny [23] model optimized for real-time on-device processing of UAV footage. They also introduced a dataset comprised of 26,740 images from the Scottish wilderness, capturing seven background types, varying distances, camera positions, environmental and lighting 4conditions, and participant appearances. The system achieved a detection rate of approximately 7 FPS on the utilized smartphone device. Sha et al. [24] developed a swimmer tracking pipeline for competitive sports, integrating distinct features such as lane ropes and pool edges to evaluate the impact of camera position and perspec-tive. Lygouras et al. [25] presented an unsupervised human detection approach for autonomous UAV-based S&R operations in an open water environment, potentially dropping flotation devices to assist distressed swimmers. They introduced a dataset from UAV perspective balancing images of swimmers and objects such as boats 1 to 1 to reduce false positives. Utilizing 9,000 images in total, 4,500 of these containing humans of different appearance, numbers, and perspectives with different lighting conditions, image sizes, and ratios, they trained and evaluated two CNN-based ob-ject detectors, YOLOv3-tiny [23] and SSD MobileNetV2 [26]. Their results indicate strong YOLO performance, though opportunities remain for further improvements. Continuing, Lygouras and Gasteratos [27] combined detection and tracking into one framework, labeling 5,000 images for training a faster R-CNN [28, 29] model with 

ResNet-101 V1 [30], while tracking was realized with a Kernelized Correlation Filter (KCF) tracker [31] combined with Histogram of Gradients (HOG) descriptors [32]. While detection precision and accuracy were persuasive, processing speed remained a bottleneck, which is important for real-time rescue. 

## 2.2 Water Rescue Simulation 

Simulation is a popular tool in Emergency Medical Service (EMS) planning. Classi-cal methods such as Queuing Theory have limitations, especially assuming a single call type or a homogeneous pool of agents, making them less suitable for modeling complex EMS systems [33]. In contrast, simulation approaches offer more flexibility and have been applied using different methodologies such as Agent-based Simula-tion (ABS) , Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) , System Dynamics , and Monte-Carlo Simulation (MCS) . Although the literature on UAV-based inland water rescue sim-ulation is limited, there are relevant studies on water rescue in general, particularly maritime S&R, as well as UAV-based S&R operations in a broader context. Cicek et al. [34] conducted a real-world simulation of a river rescue by deploying dum-mies and compared response times of UAV-based Rescue Operations (UAV-RO) 

and SRO, concluding that UAV-RO located the target significantly faster due to the UAVs’ capabilities to scan large areas faster. Similarly, Seguin et al. [35] sim-ulated UAV-based maritime S&R operations, comparing flotation device delivery times with standard lifeguard procedures. Schön [36] applied ABS in a case study on maritime S&R in Sweden, with coordinated deployment of aircraft, helicopters, and UAVs, to examine how the model representation and resolution affect the Mea-sures of Effectiveness (MoE) in Systems of Systems (SoS) evaluations. Ashrafi et al. [37] developed a scalable and flexible ABS framework for SRO in the Arctic that accounts for environmental conditions. They used MCS to assess the impact of sea-sonal changes and rescue resources on total times to rescue in the Norwegian Barents Sea. Ho et al. [38] optimized rescue plans for multiple distressed targets at sea, also taking into account operating costs, by applying the Floyd-Warshall Algorithm and 

Grey Relational Analysis (GRA) . Lee and Teixeira [39] utilized MCS as a decision 5support tool for resource allocation and search strategy selection (parallel sweep or expansion square) for maritime S&R in Portugal, considering a drift model with un-certainty propagation to incorporate target movement caused by currents and wind in the probability density maps for the target location. They found that the ex-pansion square pattern outperformed parallel sweep. In contrast to most simulation approaches which are typically DES- or ABS-based, Yang and Li [40] employed SD simulation to model coordinated water traffic emergency rescue for maritime acci-dents such as ship collisions, sinkings, or explosions. Waharte and Trigoni [41] used a grid-based 3D computer simulation approach to compare target localization times of UAV-supported S&R operation using different search heuristics in a simplified test environment. Similarly, Alotaibi et al. [42] evaluated S&R search algorithms after a natural disaster by comparing the percentages of survivors rescued. 

## 2.3 Problem Statement and Contribution 

In summary, most studies to date have focused on maritime S&R with SRO resources such as boats or helicopters, while unmanned and autonomous vehicles such as UAVs received comparatively little attention. Furthermore, inland waters such as lakes, rivers, and ponds have been largely overlooked or only addressed superficially in the literature. However, in S&R operations, specialized image-based detection models of distressed swimmers, trained on environment-specific datasets, can be critical yet also of great benefit in achieving reliable and accurate predictions [43]. To address these gaps, we introduce two main contributions. First, we present an image-based detection approach of distressed swimmers including a novel UAV-captured dataset in an Eastern German lake environment, collected in full compli-ance with data privacy regulations of the EU. The dataset includes aerial footage of humans engaged in different activities swimming, standing, diving, floating, or simulating an emergency situation, recorded by UAV from a top-down perspective. We train YOLO models for real-time detection, classifying swimmers as probably okay or probably not okay . Second, we introduce DES models to simulate both SRO water rescue and UAV-based water rescue to quantify the impact of the UAS on the response time, with the latter model allowing incorporation of any time-discrete search algorithm. 

# 3 Image-based Detection of Distressed Swimmers 

Accurate and reliable localization of distressed swimmers is essential in autonomous UAV-based S&R operations as it ensures precise drop-off of flotation devices and provision of accurate navigation data to the rescue personnel. UAVs can be equipped with a variety of sensors, many of which are useful for S&R scenarios. Sensors are generally classified as active or passive . Active sensors emit their own signal and measure the reflected response. Contrary, passive sensors detect energy emitted or reflected from external sources. Popular passive sensors include visual , thermal , and infrared (IR) cameras, as well as spectrometers , whereas popular active sensors include radio detection and ranging (radar) , light detection and ranging (LiDAR) , ultrasonic sensors (sonar) or active IR sensors [44]. Both 6sensor types have distinct benefits and drawbacks in the context of distressed swim-mer detection. Visual cameras are lightweight, compact, energy-efficient and easy to mount. However, extracting usable information from visual data requires notable computational resources, the Field Of View (FOV) is limited and performance heav-ily depends on weather and lighting conditions [44]. For the latter, IR cameras can support detection, as demonstrated by Kim et al. [45] for detecting cars in all lighting conditions. Active sensors, in contrast, are less affected by weather, have fast re-sponse times, induce less computational effort and can accurately measure distance and angular position [44]. However, they also have drawbacks, for instance LiDAR cannot detect transparent objects [44], radar’s low output resolution impedes exact object reconstruction [46]. Ultimately, sensor selection must be context-oriented, in this case with regard to water rescue. For our study, we chose a visual camera as the primary sensor since inland water swimming is typically carried out in good weather conditions, during daylight, and in relatively calm waters. Under good lighting conditions and water clarity, submerged objects are visible up to a depth of several meters from top-down UAV perspective. Moreover, the difficulty lays not in detecting a swimmer itself but rather in iden-tifying distressed swimmers. Under these circumstances, visual imaging combined with image-processing techniques provide the most promising balance of accuracy, practicality, and cost-effectiveness. To enable real-time detection and classification, we adopt the YOLO framework [15], which has worked well in similar applications. 

## 3.1 YOLO Object Detection Frameworks 

To address the detection and classification task, we employ CNN-based real-time object detection frameworks of different YOLO models. We concisely outline the concept of YOLO using YOLO version 1 (YOLOv1) as an example, followed by an overview of the specific versions used in our work, YOLOv3, YOLOv5, and YOLOv8 [15]. The YOLOv1 model, illustrated in Figure 2, is built upon the DarkNet CNN architecture [47, 48] with 24 convolutional layers, down-sampling an input image of size 448 × 448 × 3 into a 7 × 7 × 1024 feature tensor. This effectively reduces the input image (illustrated in green in Figure 2) into a 7 × 7 grid (blue), with each cell encoding 1,024 features (gray). This flattened tensor is passed through a fully connected hidden layer (orange), producing a 7 × 7 × 30 prediction tensor (pink). Each 1 × 1 × 30 prediction vector (yellow) holds 20 conditional class probabilities based on the PASCAL Visual Object Classes (PASCAL-VOC) dataset [50] and two 

1 × 1 × 5 bounding box predictions consisting of box center coordinates x and y, box height h and width w, and confidence score ψ ∈ [0 , 1] [14]. YOLOv1 uses a compound loss function, combining localization loss , confidence loss and classification loss ,enabling real-time performance, as detailed by Khan Mohammadi et al. [49]. YOLOv3 [51] significantly improves YOLOv1 regarding accuracy, speed, and detection robustness. It extends the CNN by incorporation of the Darknet-53 ar-chitecture [47, 48] with 53 convolutional layers, integrating up-sampling and feature map interconnection via the Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) [52] , which extracts high-level semantic information from deeper layers and fine-grained spatial details 7Figure 2: Schematic representation of the YOLOv1 architecture, showing the pro-cessing pipeline from input image (green) to detection output (pink/yellow) [49]. from earlier layers. The prediction tensor is extended to 80 conditional classes and three anchor bounding boxes on three different scales, resulting in a total of nine bounding boxes [53]. These anchor boxes are derived during pre-processing via di-mension clustering and serve as prior shapes for the network to learn transformations to match ground-truth bounding boxes [54]. In 2020, Ultralytics LLC introduced YOLOv5 [15, 55, 56], a PyTorch -based model with Cross Stage Partial Networks (CSPNet) [57], that improves accuracy and reduces model inference speed and model size by gradient change integration into feature maps. It retains FPN [52] and Path Aggregation Network (PANet) [58] from YOLOv3, improving low-level feature propagation for localization precision. YOLOv8 [15, 59] introduces several architectural updates, altering convolution sizes and shifting towards Residual Networks (ResNet) blocks [60]. It adopts anchor-free detection, disposing the necessity to manually specify anchor boxes, resulting in better flexibility and computational efficiency. 

## 3.2 Distressed Swimmer Detection Dataset 

Collecting high-quality image data is a key requirement for training any object detec-tion framework. In S&R context, this typically involves humans, so video recordings become sensitive data under both ethical guidelines and strict data privacy regula-tions of the EU [61]. Consequently, the required amount and quality of data is not publicly accessible. Addressing this problem, we created our own dedicated dataset, as described below. 

3.2.1 Dataset Composition 

We collected a completely new dataset of human subjects exhibiting both standard swimming movements and partially staged distress behaviors in an inland water setting. The data acquisition took place at Lake Partwitz in the Lusatian Lake 

8District in Eastern Germany over a two-day period, involving a total of 65 volunteers. All recordings were captured from UAV, in full compliance with the data privacy regulations of the EU and were also formally approved by the institution’s ethics committee (see Declarations section for details). The resulting dataset consists of 65 GB of video recordings with a resolution of 

2.560 × 1.440 pixels. Some example frames are shown in Figure 3, cropped from their original image size. An important consideration in the dataset composition is 

Figure 3: An overview of the UAV-captured dataset, in which heterogeneous groups of test subjects perform different standard swimming and distress behaviors. the diversity of visible human participants. Scenes display groups of varying sizes, including male and female participants of several ethnic backgrounds. While this distribution represents the ethnic structure of Eastern Germany up to a reasonable degree, further expansion of the data set will be necessary, especially when the framework is deployed in other regions, to enhance fairness and equity, prevent discrimination, and to improve robustness and transferability of the resulting object detection models. For clarity, the term object refers solely to detection targets within the algorithmic framework and does not imply objectification of human participants. Furthermore, the term swimmer and person will be used to refer to the individuals recorded. As outlined in Section 3.1, our approach is to train YOLO models, with the training data requiring a specific annotation format. For each image, a corresponding text file is generated holding all annotations or label names. This includes the object’s class ID and the coordinates of the corresponding bounding box: the x and y

coordinates of the center, along with its width w and height h, all normalized relative to the image dimensions. We defined two target classes, intending to distinguish between individuals not appearing to be in distress and individuals potentially in distress. This resulted in the classes “prob. ok” (the person is probably okay) and 

“prob. NOT ok” (the person is probably not okay), respectively. This classification 9is based on visible behavior of humans in the recordings, which we broadly group into five categories, as shown in Figure 4. Row-wise, the top three rows refer to the categories of swimming , floating , and standing and are assigned to the “prob. ok.” class. The two bottom rows refer to under water (diving) and face-down floating 

and are assigned to the ”prob. NOT ok” class. 

3.2.2 Dataset Preparation 

From the UAV recordings, we ultimately derived a total of 18,518 labeled images. Achieving this volume was the result of an iterative cycle of labeling, training and correcting: Initially, we manually labeled 400 original images across the two classes. For training an object detection framework, this amount is insufficiently small. We approached this issue by synthetic image creation, as discussed by Khan Mohammadi et al. [49], and dataset augmentation using standard image processing techniques. To create synthetic images, we adopted a publicly available dataset from Kaggle 

[62], featuring swimmers in an indoor pool environment performing various popular swimming styles. The indoor background was removed and the segmented swimmers were placed randomly onto the lake backgrounds from our UAV recordings. Figure 5 illustrates this procedure. As the location of the background-removed swimmer is known, bounding box labels were automatically extracted during image synthesis. However, a visual comparison with real-world UAV-captured imagery (see Figures 3 and 4 versus Figure 5) reveals significant differences. Consequently, synthetic images were only employed during the labeling process by adding 2,000 synthetic images of the class “prob. ok” to the 400 original images. 

Data augmentation can improve the general representation of certain object fea-tures, so we employ some standard data augmentation techniques, manipulating the following image attributes [63]: 1. Brightness: Simulates varying lighting conditions 2. Contrast: Adjusts intensity differences 3. Noise: Mimics distance variations and sensor characteristics 4. Motion blur: Simulates camera movement 5. Rotation: Introduces variation in object orientation 6. Translation: Simulates different object positions Each transformation was applied once per image, expanding the 2,400 images by 14,400 augmented images, resulting in a total of 16,800 images. Then, a YOLOv5x model, the extra-large variant of VOLOv5, was trained on this dataset for 100 epochs with a batch size of 12. The trained model was then applied to 2,000 additional UAV-captured images that were not part of the initial dataset. On the results, we performed a manual label correction, by removing false detections (e.g. water reflections) and by correcting misclassifications between “prob. ok” and “prob. NOT ok” . This process was repeated with the now 2,400 labeled images and stopped at 18,518 labeled images for our final dataset. This procedure enables us to scale from a 10 Figure 4: An overview of the different poses and movements in our dataset (from top row to bottom row); swimming, floating, standing, under water / diving, face-down floating. minimal unlabeled initial dataset to a large, high-quality labeled dataset, enriching real-world UAV-captured footage with synthetic and augmented data to enhance detection performance. 11 Figure 5: Synthetic image creation procedure: original swimmer image from Kaggle dataset (left), background-removed swimmer (middle), swimmer randomly placed on a lake background (right) [49]. 

# 4 Simulation of UAV-based Water Rescue Oper-ations 

Simulation is a popular tool to validate models and assess the effectiveness of so-lutions for various EMS planning problems, such as facility location optimization, shift scheduling, resource allocation and dispatching strategies [64, 65, 66]. In the following, two simulation models are presented. The first simulates water rescue SRO and the second simulates UAV-based water rescue of humans. 

## 4.1 Standard Rescue Operation Model Framework 

In order to simulate the water rescue SRO in unsupervised swimming areas, the exact procedure must first be clarified. This is described by fire department personnel and control center staff in the respective area of the Lusatian Lake District in Germany as follows: Upon receiving an emergency call, the nearest available ambulance is dispatched and the responsible volunteer fire department is alerted, which then launches a rescue boat at a suitable water access point, typically a boat ramp. Together with the paramedics, the drowning victim is then approached by boat. We summarize this in the following four phases of the simulation: 1. Alarm the nearest ambulance and fire brigade and send them to the water access point closest to the accident site. 2. Approach the selected water access point using the fastest path on the street network from the nearest ambulance and fire station, respectively. 3. Prepare the lifeboat and optionally wait for paramedics to arrive at the loca-tion. 4. Approach the accident location from the water access point using the fastest path on the water surface. 12 To formally describe this process, we introduce the following notation: We define a set of fire stations F housing fire trucks, lifeboats and flotation devices and a set of rescue stations R housing ambulances. Further, we define a set of water access points W where lifeboats can be launched into the water. We suppose a static target position τ ∈ R2 over time. Now, we define travel times δr,w ∈ R≥0 from 

r ∈ R to w ∈ W and travel times ˜δf,w ∈ R≥0 from f ∈ F to w ∈ W as well as travel times ¯δw, τ ∈ R≥0 from w ∈ W to τ . We also define preparation times ϑF ,

ϑR before starting the operation for the firefighters and paramedics, respectively. Finally, we determine the response time or target approach time tmin  

> τ

. We identify the nearest water access point ¯w = arg min w∈W ¯δw, τ to the target τ as well as the nearest ambulance station ¯r = arg min r∈R δr, ¯w and the nearest fire station ¯f =

arg min f ∈F ˜δf, ¯w. Thus, we can compute 

tmin  

> τ

= max {ϑF + ˜δ ¯f , ¯w, ϑ R + δ¯r, ¯w} + ¯δ ¯w, τ (1) The first term max {ϑF + ˜δ ¯f , ¯w, ϑ R +δ¯r, ¯w} is utilized to synchronize the forces since approaching the target on water from the water access point can only be started with both the firefighters and the paramedics on the lifeboat. We now employ a MCS approach by generating N samples τn of τ and computing statistical parameters such as mean, median, and various quantiles of the estimated response time tmin  

> τ

.Note that in the above simulation approach we made some simplifying assumptions especially assuming a stationary target with known location. In practice, the search operation will take additional time finding the exact location of the person. This indicates that the value of tmin  

> τ

can be interpreted as a kind of lower bound for the target approach time. This approach is further explored in the case study in section 5.2.1, which examines the specific choice of calculation methods for the proposed sets and parameters. 

## 4.2 UAV-based Water Rescue Model Framework 

We introduce a simulation framework that is designed to evaluate the performance of UAV-based search algorithms, which is particularly applicable to the proposed flight trajectory optimization model deployed by Zell et al. [67] but also for every other search algorithm with discrete time steps. Here, time is discretized using a time horizon T , time step length ∆tf ∈ R>0, nf ∈ N and the set Tf = {0, 1, 2, . . . , n f T }.We define the target position τt = ( τ xt , τ yt )T ∈ R2 and the UAV position ru,t =(rxu,t , r yu,t )T ∈ R2 for UAV u ∈ U at time step t ∈ T f . The components of ru,t , τt refer to Cartesian x- and y-direction, respectively. Using the top-down camera’s vertical and horizontal aperture angles αu, βu ∈ [0 , π ] and the UAV’s flight altitude above ground ηu ∈ R>0, we can compute the vertical and horizontal FOVs au, b u ∈ R>0.

Since the UAV’s camera perspective is top-down, the flight altitude is sufficiently low to neglect the Earth’s curvature, and the topographic profile of the landscape is negligible due to the flat water surface, we can use trigonometry to obtain: 

au/2 = ηu tan αu (2) 

bu/2 = ηu tan βu (3) 13 This trigonometric relation is illustrated in Figure 6. Note that a free-moving camera cannot be modeled this way and requires a more sophisticated approach. However, this would also mean a further degree of freedom in the optimization of the search mission, namely the consideration of the camera position in addition to the flight route planning. We consider the air vectors ιu,t = ( ιxu,t , ι yu,t )T ∈ R2 and ground 

Figure 6: An illustration of the calculation of the horizontal FOV a for a top-down UAV camera with angular FOV α and flight altitude h (The lateral FOV is analogous). vectors ϱu,t = ( ϱxu,t , ϱ yu,t )T ∈ R2 of UAV u ∈ U at time step t ∈ T f as well as the wind vectors wt ∈ R2 with ϱu,t = ιu,t + wt. We are now interested in computing the true heading angles ξu,t to determine if the target is within the UAV’s FOV. This is the angle between true north vector q = (0 , 1) T and ιu,t which can be calculated as follows: 

cos ξu,t = q · ιu,t 

∥q∥ ∥ ιu,t ∥ = ιyu,t 

(ιxu,t )2 + ( ιyu,t )2 . (4) We utilize ζ = ( a/ 2, b/ 2) T and two-dimensional rotation matrix 

Rγ =

(cos γ − sin γ

sin γ cos γ

)

. (5) To determine if a target is detected by UAV u ∈ U at time step t ∈ T f , we check if the following condition holds: 

−ζ ≤ Rξu,t · (ru,t − τt) ≤ ζ. (6) Rewriting Equation (6) component-wise, we obtain 

−a

2 ≤ cos ξu,t (rxu,t − τx,t ) − sin ξu,t (ryu,t − τy,t ) ≤ a

2 , (7) 

− b

2 ≤ sin ξu,t (rxu,t − τx,t ) + cos ξu,t (ryu,t − τy,t ) ≤ b

2. (8) Utilizing sets Vu, τ := {t ∈ T f | − ζ ≤ Rξ · (ru,t − τt) ≤ ζ} of time steps where the target is visible for UAV u ∈ U , we define the UAV’s target approach time for UAV 

u ∈ U as 14 tmin  

> u, τ

:= 

{

min Vu, τ , if Vτ̸ = ∅,

∞, else. (9) and the overall target approach time or response time as 

tmin  

> τ

= min  

> u∈U

tmin  

> u, τ

. (10) The exact target location is typically unknown in advance, as knowing it would make the S&R operation redundant. Since a drowning person is typically exhausted and almost immobilized, we assume a stationary target τ = τt for all t ∈ T f and model it as a random variable. We may use different search methods m ∈ M and want to compare them by their rate of successful to unsuccessful target detections χm ∈ [0 , 1] 

as well as their average finite detection time ¯tm ∈ R+. We employ a MCS approach by generating N samples τn of τ and computing target detection time tmin  

> τn,m

per method m ∈ M for n = 1 , . . . , N . This estimation method is meaningful only if we omit infinite target detection times, excluding cases where the target remains undetected. We define the sets N det m = {tmin 

> τn,m

, n = 1 , . . . N |tmin  

> τn,m

< ∞} and obtain 

¯tm = 1

|N det m |

∑ 

> i∈N det m

i, (11) 

χm = |N det m |

N . (12) This approach allows us to quantify the gains in terms of response time and target detection rate when using additional UAVs and different search methods. Further, this allows us to compare different hangar location-allocation configurations. 

# 5 Case Study and Scenario Analysis 

The models presented earlier in Sections 3 and 4 are applied to a test area in the 

Lusatian Lake District in Eastern Germany. The entire Lusatian region is an open-cast lignite mining area, where disused sites are flooded, creating Europe’s largest artificial lake landscape. This is shown in Figure 7. The aim of flooding these areas was to make them attractive to tourists, with swimming and other water sports proving very popular. However, large parts of these areas are not supervised by lifeguards. We therefore outline the benefits of UAS as additional support unit to enhance swimmer safety in this region. 

## 5.1 Distressed Swimmer Detection and Localization 

In order to train and evaluate the performance of an object detection framework, two different datasets are required. The training dataset contains training images and labels as well as validation images and labels. The latter typically comprises roundabout 10% of the entire training dataset. For a reasonable performance test-ing, a separate evaluation dataset is needed, that contains images not seen by the framework during training. 15 (a) The many artificial lakes in the Lusatian Lake District, visualized with OpenStreetMap (OSM) .

> (b) The active lignite open-cast mines (Welzow in the north, Nochten in the east) are clearly visible on ESRI’s satellite map.

Figure 7: Lusatian Lake District, Germany. We separated 1,018 images for the evaluation dataset and were left with 17,500 images for the training dataset. The latter has been augmented again, but in a slightly different way than before. In order to augment each image, we took the mentioned image manipulations from Section 3.2.2 and randomly applied two of them at the same time to one image. In other words, for each original image we have one augmented image with two manipulated characteristics. In the end, the resulting 35,000 images were split to 31,500 training images and 3,500 validation images for the training dataset. 

5.1.1 Performance Evaluation 

To systematically assess the capabilities of the YOLO framework, we trained and compared three YOLO versions YOLOv3, YOLOv5, and YOLOv8, each with two different architecture sizes (nano and extra-large). Model performance was evaluated using the mean Average Precision (mAP) metric, specifically the mAP@[.5] and mAP@[.5:.95] variants [68]. Both metrics are based on the Intersection over Union (IoU) ϕ ∈ [0 , 1] , quantifying the overlap between the actual Ground Truth bounding box and the predicted bounding box as a ratio. A prediction is considered a True Positive (TP) if the IoU exceeds a predefined IoU threshold T IoU , else it is considered a False Positive (FP) . The prediction is a False Negative (FN) if a true object is missed. Table 1 summarizes those metrics for T IoU = 0 .5. It is important to note that the categories in Table 1 are separately found with respect to each class. From those categories and with defining another detection threshold T DET corresponding to YOLOs confidence score ψ, we derive additional metrics precision p = p(T DET , T IoU )

and recall r = r(T DET , T IoU ) as follows: 

p = #T P 

#T P + # F P , r = #T P 

#F P + # F N . (13) Here, the annotation #( . . . ) denotes the respective number of obtained values in the evaluation dataset. By fixing IoU threshold T IoU and varying detection threshold 

T DET , we obtain multiple precision-recall pairs (p(T DET , T IoU ), r (T DET , T IoU )) that are used to compute the Average Precision (AP) ¯p, the area under the so-called 16 Name IoU value Description True Positive (TP) IoU ≥ 0.5 Prediction and ground truth are overlapping to a degree that is considered a correct detection. False Positive (FP) IoU < 0.5 Prediction and ground truth are either in different locations or the overlap is not large enough to be considered a correct detection or there is a prediction without a given ground truth False Negative (FN) IoU not defined No Prediction for a given ground truth. Table 1: Comparison of possible cases for the prediction and the ground truth, based on the IoU. 

precision-recall curve ˆp(r) : [0 , 1] → [0 , 1] , which views precision p as a function of recall r:

¯p =

∫ 1

> r=0

ˆp(r) dr (14) We use the commonly specified AP@[.5] , using an indulgent IoU threshold T IoU =0.5 to primarily indicate if an object is detected at all. We will also employ 

AP@[.5:.95] , where the AP is averaged over IoU thresholds T IoU  

> k

= 0 .5, 0.55 , 0.6, . . . , 0.95 ,which is stricter, evaluating both detection and localization accuracy. When evalu-ating multiple classes, the individual APs are averaged over all classes to obtain the mAP. While mAP@[.5] emphasizes object presence, mAP@[.5:.95] provides a more comprehensive measure for localization accuracy. 

5.1.2 Experimental Setup 

The deployed computational devices and their corresponding hardware components are specified in Table 2 and are in the following referred to as “PC” and “Laptop” .Every YOLO model was trained with 200 epochs and a batch size of 12. We em-ployed the nano (-n) and the extra lage (-x) architecture sizes of the YOLO model, with the nano versions being lightweight with focus on efficiency on limited hardware and the extra-large versions containing substantially more layers and parameters, trading speed for accuracy [15]. Device PC Laptop CPU 32 × Intel Xeon Gold 6346 CPU 16 × 13th Gen Intel Core i7-1360P GPU RTX A2000 GPU 12GB, 3328 CUDA cores RTX A500 Laptop GPU 4GB, 2048 CUDA cores Table 2: Central Processing Unit (CPU) and Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) spec-ifications for the utilized devices “PC” and “Laptop” in the evaluation process. 17 5.1.3 Quantitative Results 

Regarding the deployed YOLO models, the corresponding mAP values for the train-ing (“train”) and performance evaluation (“eval”) are shown in Table 3. The re-YOLO model -v3n -v5n -v8n -v3x -v5x -v8x train mAP.5 0.995 0.995 0.995 0.995 0.995 0.995 train mAP.5:.95 0.935 0.970 0.970 0.984 0.984 0.986 eval mAP.5 0.994 0.994 0.994 0.993 0.993 0.993 eval mAP.5:.95 0.945 0.974 0.975 0.983 0.983 0.985 Table 3: Mean Average Precision (mAP) metrics for different YOLO models and architecture sizes, automatically returned by the framework after the final training epoch (train mAP) and afterwards computed during the evaluation process (eval mAP). sults indicate that both YOLOv5n and YOLOv8n perform on the same level, as do their respective -x counterparts. Only YOLOv3n shows a significantly lower mAP@[.5:.95]. Across all versions, the extra-large models yield higher mAP@[.5:.95] values than nano models, while the mAP@[.5] remains nearly identical. These re-sults confirm the benefit of evaluating both mAP values, since mAP@[.5] only cov-ers detection and mAP@[.5:.95] additionally captures localization accuracy, which is particularly important for varying swimmer postures and orientations. Further improvements might be achieved by dataset extension and extending the training process, as the method of early stopping terminates the process when no improve-ment is made over the last epochs. However, it is a thin line to avoid overfitting .To evaluate real-time applicability of the detection framework, we measured the 

Time Per Image (TPI) , comprising the total processing time per image, which was automatically obtained from the framework. We derived the corresponding frame rate in FPS as reciprocal from the TPI (rounded down), as displayed for the trained YOLO networks on the GPU and CPU devices “PC” and “Laptop” in Table 4 and Table 5 for the nano and extra-large architecture, respectively. In this context, real-time performance is associated with a frame rate of at least 30 FPS [69, 70, 71]. The Model YOLOv3n YOLOv5n YOLOv8n TPI FPS TPI FPS TPI FPS PC GPU 3.0ms 333 1.8ms 555 1.8ms 555 PC CPU 16.6ms 60 51.3ms 19 56.0ms 17 LAPTOP GPU 9.7ms 103 7.7ms 129 6.4ms 156 LAPTOP CPU 79.5ms 12 64.5ms 15 80.1ms 12 Table 4: Total processing TPI in milliseconds (ms) and frame rate in FPS for dif-ferent YOLO models and their smallest (nano) architecture sizes. results indicate a very strong performance for the nano architecture of all YOLO models on the GPU for both PC and Laptop with a frame rate of 103 to 555 FPS. On 18 Model YOLOv3x YOLOv5x YOLOv8x TPI FPS TPI FPS TPI FPS PC GPU 14.3ms 69 19.0ms 52 22.2ms 45 PC CPU 100.7ms 9 125.3ms 7 1003.8ms 0LAPTOP GPU 57.1ms 17 74.2ms 13 80.3ms 12 LAPTOP CPU 580.1ms 1 780.3ms 1 1624.3ms 0Table 5: Total processing TPI in milliseconds (ms) and frame rate in FPS for dif-ferent YOLO models and their largest (extra-large) architecture sizes. the PC, even the extra-large architecture achieves real-time performance on GPU, but their performance drops below real-time on the laptop. On CPU, no architecture except YOLOv3n reached real-time performance, revealing the importance of GPU employment. Overall, the extra-large models offer superior detection and localization accu-racy but require considerably more computational resources. When a centralized, high-performance device is available, extra-large architectures are arguably the best option. However, this requires permanent data transfer between the centralized device and the UAV, which may introduce bandwidth and latency limitations. In comparison, nano architectures are less accurate but sufficiently lightweight to be run directly on a UAV. This makes them a practical alternative for scenarios involving UAV fleets or constrained communication, ensuring responsiveness and scalability through decentralized on-board processing. 

5.1.4 Swimmer Localization and Alert Definition 

After the quantitative evaluation of YOLO performance metrics, we now address a qualitative evaluation by showing and discussing representative detection results. Figure 8 shows six detection results of the same scene using all trained YOLO versions and their respective architectures. The upper row corresponds to the nano architectures and the lower row to the extra-large architectures, respectively. At first glance, the images indicate that the class “prob. ok” is consistently detected with a high confidence, with a minimum of 0.93 for nano models to 0.95 for their extra-large counterparts. More relevant for our study is the detection of the “prob. NOT ok” class, where the nano versions only reach a minimum confidence 0.61 , while the extra-large counterparts achieve 0.95 . This discrepancy might be explained by the limited number of training samples for the “prob. NOT ok” class, reducing the robustness of the lightweight models. Thus, in terms of accuracy, Figure 8 again emphasizes the superiority of extra-large architectures for this critical task. Interestingly, YOLOv3n outperforms YOLOv5n in this case, despite lower overall mAP values in the quantitative evaluation. However, this does not apply for all scenes. Another common challenge in object detection is to distinguish objects in close proximity. The trained models can reliably detect multiple swimmers very close within a group, even when bounding boxes overlap. This is illustrated in Figure 9, employing YOLOv8x. Importantly, these images show no false classifications or 19 Figure 8: Detection results for all trained YOLO models and architectures. The top row shows nano variants (YOLOv3n, -v5n, -v8n), while the bottom row presents extra-large variants (YOLOv3x, -v5x, -v8x). false localizations, as only swimmers are detected, while other surface structures such as water reflections and vegetation (reed) are correctly excluded. A partic-

Figure 9: Detection results with YOLOv8x in a scene containing multiple swimmers, some in close proximity, being successfully distinguished and classified by the model. ularly important aspect of our work involves the detection of the ”prob. NOT ok” 

20 Figure 10: Sequence of detection results with YOLOv8n, illustrating the transition of a swimmer’s classification from ”prob. ok” to ”prob. NOT ok” , highlighting the model’s ability to capture dynamic behavioral changes. class and the ability to recognize transitions between the classes. Figure 10 shows a sequence of frames (from top left to bottom right) where four people are swimming regularly, one person is floating without movement, which is correctly identified as “prob. NOT ok”, and a swimmer is classified as “prob. ok” in the first two frames, then begins to dive, after which the label correctly switches to “prob. NOT ok” for the remainder of the sequence. Based on the training data, this is a very solid result, demonstrating the potential of the models to capture dynamic changes in swimmer behavior. Building on that, a robust alerting strategy could be implemented by evaluating recent classifications in a sliding window (e.g. 30 frames). If a ratio of detections is classified as “prob. NOT ok”, the swimmer could be flagged as poten-tially in distress, even if frames occasionally produce “prob. ok” labels. Nonetheless, some limitations are evident. Figure 11a shows a false positive, caused by light re-flections on the water surface, mistakenly captured by YOLOv5n. Additionally, Figure 11b shows an unclear detection, classifying a swimmer as both “prob. ok” and “prob. NOT ok” simultaneously. This phenomenons might be related to the nano architecture, and increasing the detection threshold solves these issues. Fur-thermore, in extreme cases of light reflection, employing further pre-processing steps can reduce the impact and enhance detection robustness. 

## 5.2 Simulation 

In the following, we apply the simulation frameworks from Sections 4.1 and 4.2 to the test area in the Lusatian Lake District which is specified by the black outline in Figure 12 and is referred to as operational area. 

5.2.1 Standard Rescue Operation Simulation 

First, we need to define the sets of fire stations F, rescue stations R and water access points W. We load the rescue stations and fire stations from OSM (key-tag 21 (a) A false positive detection caused by light re-flections at the bottom of the image. 

> (b) Unclear classification of a swimmer as “prob. ok” and “prob. NOT ok”.

Figure 11: Examples of failure cases of the YOLOv5n model. pairs “amenity = fire_station” and “emergency = ambulance_station”) within a radius of 20 and 2 kilometers, respectively, from the operational area. Furthermore, we load potential water access points from OSM, using slipways and ferry terminals (key-tag pairs “leisure = slipway” and “amenity = ferry_terminal”). Since no such points are marked on OSM for one of the lakes, Lake Sedlitz, we added artificial water access points there in consultation with local authorities. All determined water access points are shown in Figure 12 in prink, green, or blue. To determine travel distances δr,w and ˜δf,w we compute the fastest paths from emergency stations 

r ∈ R and fire stations f ∈ F to the water access points w ∈ W by loading the street network from OSM, finding the respective nearest nodes on the graph and running Dijkstra’s algorithm [72] using the associated travel times as edge weights that are determined by the length and speed limit of the associated road section, which may be exceeded by ambulances and fire trucks. According to the findings of Pappinen and Nordquist [73], the respective speed limits may be exceeded for urgent emergency services, but by no more than 30% on average. As this is a very urgent operation, we assume a 30% increased speed limit to calculate the travel times for every road. Since the nearest node of the OSM street network may be some distance away from the water access point, we determine the Euclidean distance, set a speed of 10 km/h for this additional distance to be covered on foot and add it to the travel time to ultimately obtain δr,w and ˜δf,w . We calculate travel times ¯δw, τ from the nearest water access point w ∈ W to the accident site τ by calculating the shortest path using the visibility graph algorithm developed by Lee [74] to guarantee staying on the water surface and we use Dijkstra’s algorithm [72] to find the shortest path. Firefighting and rescue boats in Germany must comply with German standard DIN 14961 [75], defining its technical requirements. Of the various boat models, we selected the highest maximum speed we could find, 70 kilometers per hour for an upgraded high-tech boat [76], as a reference speed to finally compute boat travel times ¯δw, τ . Note that this is a very optimistic estimate, as most lifeboats with equipment and several people on board do not reach this maximum speed in reality. We determine the preparation times ϑF , ϑ R of the firefighters and paramedics 22 until departure from their respective stations. Since paramedics are located directly at the rescue station, we assume ϑR = 0 . The fire departments in the region are exclusively volunteer fire departments, which is why firefighters are usually not di-rectly at the fire station but available on demand via radio. After being alerted, they rush to the fire department. Unfortunately, there is no good quality data available on the preparation times for volunteer fire departments, as data availability in EMS is generally a problem. There are also regional differences, as each federal state has its own laws for emergency services and firefighting. We assume a truncated normal distribution ϑR ∼ T N (μ, σ 2; a, b ) with mean μ = 120 , variance σ2 = 30 and limits 

a = 0 and b = 240 (in seconds). This is on average slightly less than local experts es-timate, as all conventions for determining the variables are rather optimistic, which means that the simulation will make an optimistic estimate on the target detection time. An example SRO is depicted in Figure 12, including the fastest paths of the nearest ambulance (violet line) and the nearest fire brigade (orange line) and the shortest path on water from water access point to swimmer location (blue line). Finally, we perform a MCS with N MCS = 10 , 000 runs. To this end, we consulted experts to define several hotspot areas where swimming is particularly popular. We then used OSM to define weights and assign them to each hotspot area, as detailed by Zell et al. [67]. Those hotspot areas are depicted in Fig 12. Now, in each of the 

Figure 12: Illustration of an exemplary water rescue SRO in the Lusatian Lake District, Germany including the fastest path of the nearest ambulance (purple line), fire truck (orange line) and life boat (blue line) as well as predefined hot spot areas (red areas). 

N MCS runs, a hotspot area is sampled randomly according to the weighting of the areas in which the target is then randomly placed following a uniform distribution. 23 The results of the MCS are summarized with a histogram of the target approach time in Fig 13. It can be seen that the target approach time does not follow a unimodal distribution and varies widely. It always takes at least 150 seconds, with a mean of roundabout 13 minutes, but can also increase to almost 23 minutes, depending heavily on the specific location of the emergency. 

Figure 13: Histogram of the estimated target approach time for a SRO of a distressed swimmer, based on a MCS with N MCS = 10 , 000 iterations. 

5.2.2 UAV-based Water Rescue Simulation 

The simulation approach presented in Section 4 is now use to estimate speed and reliability of locating distressed swimmers with a specific UAS configuration and search algorithm. For this, we use performance indicators average finite detection time ¯tm target detection rate χm ∈ [0 , 1] from Equations (11) and (12), respectively. These performance indicators refer to the response time and the success rate. In the simulation, we consider the predefined target areas from Figure 12: pop-ular swimming areas, predefined in consultation with local experts. Within these areas, the distressed swimmer is assumed to be stationary over time and is placed at random (following a uniform distribution over the search area). We can then de-termine whether and how quickly the target is found by the UAS. This experiment is repeated N MCS times to enable a Monte Carlo simulation (MCS). We employ the location-allocation optimization MILP from Part 1 of this paper series for UAS configuration planning, determining the hangar locations and UAV allocations for the simulation. Similarly, we employ the in-advance offline S&R flight planning MILP from Part 1 of this series as a search algorithm. The aforementioned models are also described by Zell et al. [67]. Since some of the search areas are up to several minutes away from the UAS locations, we split the S&R operation into two parts: The approach flight from the hangar to the target area and the search flight within the target area. First, we determine the point on the edge of the target area that is closest to the hangar and approach it first. Next, this point serves as the starting point for the search flight. This implies that, instead of solving one large MILP for the entire mission in a designated search area, a very small MILP must be solved for the approach flight, not containing any waypoints, and a moderately large MILP must be solved for the search flight. This can still be 24 computationally intensive, but not nearly as much as without splitting into two MILPs. We performed the simulation for various instances, namely for the solutions of the Capacitated Cooperative Maximum Covering Location Problem (CCMCLP) 

with p = 1 , . . . , 6 homogeneous hangars to be set up containing a single UAV from a homogeneous fleet (cp. first instance of Zell et al. [67]). In each experiment, 

N MCS = 100000 S&R operations were performed. Note that only those search areas within the range of the available battery power of the UAS are considered, as determined by the CCMCLP. Other areas are excluded from the search and associated targets are declared untraceable. The results of the simulations are logical: the more resources deployed, the better the detection rate and average detection time. Table 6 summarizes the results for different UAS configurations as indicated by the p value for numbers of hangars used. From that, it seems that two UAVs can cover the area almost completely with a success rate of more than 99 %, but there is still a lot to gain in terms of average detection time. p Average detection time ¯tp[s] Success rate χp[%] Simulation run time [s]

1 371 .82 57 .31 28 .79 

2 155 .88 99 .39 76 .07 

3 123 .94 99 .64 103 .64 

4 100 .47 99 .53 144 .15 

5 101 .56 99 .50 174 .91 

6 94 .09 99 .54 204 .15 

Table 6: UAS-based water rescue simulation results including the average detection time (in seconds), detection rate (in percent) and computing times such as the time to solve the location-allocation MILP, the average time to solve the Search & Rescue MILP and the computing time of the MCS with 100 , 000 runs on a MacBook Pro (Intel Core i9 running 1 thread at 2.4 GHz clock speed and 64 GB RAM). Figure 14 depicts histograms of the simulated response or detection times for 

p = 1 , p = 2 , p = 3 and p = 6 , respectively. The differences are remarkable: with only one hangar, it takes an average of about 6 minutes with a success rate of 57% , while with 6 hangars, around 90% of the simulated missions are completed in less than 2 minutes, with a success rate of 99 .54% . Now, comparing the UAS-based results to the conventional SRO, with an average response time of around 13 minutes (cp. Figure 13), the benefits of the UAS become clear. Although the computational effort required for the simulation is relatively modest, the overall computational effort per UAS configuration is very high, as a lot of computing time is required for location-allocation optimization and S&R flight route optimization by solving the large associated MILPs. The computing time for the latter MILP is particularly significant, varying per scenario from an average of approximately 50 minutes to 74 minutes. For all target areas, the 65 hotspot areas from Figure 12 in our case, this adds up to 54 to 80 hours per scenario. This illustrates how the computational effort quickly accumulates for the entire framework, which is why we have limited our consideration in this paper to the six scenarios from Table 6. To maintain control over this, the instance sizes must be kept moderate, which involves 25 1      ""   !! 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

 !"$   

> !"   " ""  

  1 

 1 

 !" # "   

  # "   (a) p = 1 0 00 00 00 00 00 00 !!     

0000 

000 

000 

000 

000 

000 

000 

000   !#   

>  !    ! !!  

   

  00 

 ! "!   00 

 "!   (b) p = 2 0 00 00 00 00 00 00 ""   !! 

0000 

000 

000 

000 

000 !"$   

> !"   " ""  

  

   

 !" # "   

  # "   

(c) p = 3 0 00 00 00 00 00 00 ""   !! 

0000 

000 

000 

000 

000 

000 !"$   

> !"   " ""  

   

  0 

 !" # "  0 

  # "   (d) p = 6 

Figure 14: Histograms for the simulation of 100,000 S&R operations using UAS configurations with different numbers of hangars p and respective success rates of 

χ(p=1) = 57 .3% , χ(p=2) = 99 .39% , χ(p=3) = 99 .64% , and χ(p=6) = 99 .54% .careful adjustment of the model parameters. 

# 6 Conclusions 

In this paper, we presented a comprehensive framework for UAV-assisted water rescue in inland waters, based on an Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) located on land near swimming areas, consisting of UAVs stored in purpose-built UAV hangars. Developed as a complement to conventional water rescue, the UAS can be deployed automatically to assist in the Search and Rescue (S&R) of distressed swimmers by scanning a search area with a visual camera using automatic swimmer recognition assistance and potentially dropping off a flotation device. Our work focused on two main aspects: a toolkit for automatic real-time image detection of distressed swimmers and a simulation-based assessment of water rescue operations. Both were applied within a case study in the Lusatian Lake District in Eastern Germany as part of the research project RescueFly .For the detection task, we addressed the challenge of creating a fully automated 26 real-time identification system for distressed swimmers adopting the established You Only Look Once (YOLO) method. Due to the scarcity of appropriate training data, we introduced a new UAV captured dataset allowing classification of swimmers as ei-ther “probably okay” or “probably not okay”. The trained models showed solid real-time performance, measured by TPI and FPS, and high accuracy, evaluated through mAP.5 and mAP.5:.95, with architecture sizes tailored for lower-performance hard-ware. Nevertheless, further dataset expansion is necessary to achieve full automa-tion, as the current dataset contains only simulated emergency behavior. We rec-ommend extending coverage to location-specific ethnic groups and vulnerable age groups (children, seniors), different inland water environments and incorporating im-age sequence analysis, as reliable classification cannot be based exclusively on single frames. Ensuring robustness and reliability remains critical for such an important safety application. The simulation models developed in this study enable a direct comparison be-tween Standard Rescue Operations (SROs) and UAS-assisted rescue of swimmers in inland waters in terms of rapid accessibility, which is the critical factor in wa-ter rescue. Using a Discrete Event Simulation (DES) approach, we modeled SROs following the standard procedure for inland water rescue for the Lusatian Lake Dis-trict , deploying the nearest ambulance and the nearest fire brigade to provide a life boat to approach the target. Further, we developed a generic DES-based sim-ulation model compatible with any time-discrete UAV-based S&R algorithm. By employing Monte Carlo Simulation (MCS) , we estimated the mean target approach time, which is defined as the time until the first rescue resources (lifeboat or UAV) reaches the target and can provide a flotation device. We found that some highly frequented swimming areas are difficult to access quickly using SRO, resulting in target approach times of between 2.5 and 23 under optimistic assumptions regarding preparation and travel time. In contrast, even a UAS consisting of only two UAVs and two hangars achieved a substantial improvement in the test scenario for the mean target approach time by a factor of 5 from roundabout 13 minutes to about 

2.5 minutes. This demonstrates that a carefully and individually configured UAS is a valuable addition to the existing response system. Here, the performance of the UAS depends not only on the UAV and hangar specifications, but also signifi-cantly on demand and area size. For full-area coverage, the simulation framework provides a practical tool to estimate resource requirements, also benefiting from models developed in Part 1 of this paper series for in-advance flight route planning and location-allocation optimization. Possible extensions of the framework include incorporation of human behavior such as bystander intervention or movement of distressed swimmers and also improving the currently limited data basis for water rescue operations. Taken together, the automated real-time detection framework and simulation-based evaluation framework form a valuable tool kit for enhancing swimmer safety in unsupervised inland water swimming areas. Real-time detection enables rapid iden-tification of distressed swimmers, while simulation facilitates data-driven planning and optimized individual resource allocation, offering an integrated approach rang-ing from strategic resource deployment to real-time operational decision-making. The integration of the capabilities enables UAV-assisted water rescue operations to 27 overcome access restrictions, shorten response times and therapy-free intervals, and ultimately improve survival chances in critical situations. Even though further re-finements of models and datasets are needed, the presented framework contributes to a scalable and transferable basis towards future design, deployment and stan-dardization of UAV-assisted water rescue in inland waters and beyond. Finally, we want to emphasize the importance of advancing this research area and developing solutions that make noticeable improvements in emergency situations. We strongly believe that collaboration between experts from different disciplines, combined with progressive testing and improvements, will ultimately lead to UAV-assisted water rescue making a significant impact on improving swimmer safety. 

# Acknowledgements 

The authors express their gratitude to IRLS Lausitz (Cottbus) and IRLS Ostsachsen (Hoyerswerda) for their productive collaboration in historical data collection as well as the whole RescueFly project group for fruitful collaboration and inspiration. 

# Conflict of interest 

The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this article. 

# Funding 

This study was funded by the German Federal Ministry for Digital and Transport (Bundesministerium für Digitales und Verkehr (BMDV)) within the project Res-cueFly (reference number 45ILM1016C) as well as by the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (Bundesministerium für Forschung, Technolo-gie und Raumfahrt (BMFTR)) within the project KI@MINT (reference number 16DHBKI052). 

# Ethics approval 

The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus-Senftenberg (protocol code: EK2024-07, date of approval: April 22, 2024). Informed consent was obtained from each individual for the part of the research involving human participants. 

# Data availability 

The authors declare, that upon reasonable request, the data and the code are avail-able from the corresponding author. 28 Author contributions 

Conceptualization: Sascha Zell, Toni Schneidereit, Armin Fügenschuh, Michael Breuß; Methodology: Sascha Zell, Toni Schneidereit, Armin Fügenschuh, Micha-el Breuß; Software: Sascha Zell, Toni Schneidereit; Validation: Sascha Zell, Toni Schneidereit; Formal analysis: Sascha Zell, Toni Schneidereit; Investigation: Sascha Zell, Toni Schneidereit; Resources: Sascha Zell; Data curation: Sascha Zell, Toni Schneidereit; Writing-original draft preparation: Sascha Zell, Toni Schneidereit; Writing-review and editing: Armin Fügenschuh; Visualization: Sascha Zell, Toni Schneidereit; Supervision: Armin Fügenschuh, Michael Breuß; Project administra-tion: Armin Fügenschuh, Michael Breuß; Funding acquisition: Armin Fügenschuh, Michael Breuß 

# References 

[1] Silviu Petrescu, Gabriel Piţigoi, and Mihaela Păunescu. The Effects of Prac-ticing Swimming on the Psychological Tone in Adulthood. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences , 159:74–77, 2014. doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.12.331. [2] Salman Jalalifar, Andrew Belford, Eila Erfani, Amir Razmjou, Rouzbeh Ab-bassi, Masoud Mohseni-Dargah, and Mohsen Asadnia. Enhancing Water Safety: Exploring Recent Technological Approaches for Drowning Detection. Sensors ,24(2):331, 2024. doi: 10.3390/s24020331. [3] Tessa Clemens. Addressing Gaps in our Understanding of the Epi-demiology of Drowning at the Global, National, and Local Level .Ph.D. thesis, York University, Toronto, ON, January 2017. Available at https://yorkspace.library.yorku.ca/server/api/core/bitstreams/ 541f7412-92b0-456f-81ce-b5bcf66892a9/content .[4] Deutsche Lebens-Rettungs-Gesellschaft (DLRG). DLRG Statistik 2023: Min-destens 378 Menschen in Deutschland ertrunken, 2023. URL https:// www.dlrg.de/informieren/die-dlrg/presse/statistik-ertrinken/ . (Ac-cessed: 2025-10-01). [5] Samuel Ndueso John, I. G. Ukpabio, O. Omoruyi, Godfrey Onyiagha, Etinosa Noma-Osaghae, and K. O. Okokpujie. Design of a Drowning Rescue Alert System. Int. J. Mech. Eng. Technol. (IJMET) , 10(1):1987–1995, 2019. [6] J. von Beesten, H. Braßel, M. Breuß, H. Fricke, W. Hardt, A. Heller, E. Kern, M. Khan Mohammadi, M. Lindner, E. Pfister, T. Schneidereit, T. Stuchtey, A. M. Yarahmadi, T. Zeh, S. Zell, and T. Zügel. RescueFly – Einsatz von dezentral stationierten Drohnen (“Unmanned Aircraft Systems”, UAS) zur Un-terstützung bei der Wasserrettung in schwer zugänglichen und weitflächigen Gebieten. Technical Report 11, Brandenburgisches Institut für Gesellschaft und Sicherheit (BIGS), 2024. URL https://rescuefly.org/wp-content/ uploads/2024/03/BIGS-Studie-11-2024-WEB-final.pdf . BIGS Studie Nummer 11. 29 [7] Restube GmbH. Restubes, 2024. URL https://restube.com/collections/ restubes . (Accessed: 2025-10-01). [8] Ariane Heller, Reda Harradi, and Wolfram Hardt. Hangar System for Un-manned Aerial Vehicle Autonomous Missions. In 2024 International Symposium ELMAR , pages 291–294, Zadar, Croatia, 2024. doi: 10.1109/ELMAR62909. 2024.10694237. [9] P.M. Schwartz. Global Data Privacy: The EU Way. NYUL Rev. , 94: 771–818, 2019. URL https://www.nyulawreview.org/wp-content/uploads/ 2019/10/NYULAWREVIEW-94-4-Schwartz.pdf .[10] P. Zhu, L. Wen, D. Du, X. Bian, H. Fan, Q. Hu, and H. Ling. Detection and Tracking Meet Drones Challenge. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 44(11):7380–7399, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2021. 3119563. [11] Leon Amadeus Varga, Benjamin Kiefer, Martin Messmer, and Andreas Zell. SeaDronesSee: A Maritime Benchmark for Detecting Humans in Open Water. In 2022 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 3686–3696, 2022. doi: 10.1109/WACV51458.2022.00374. [12] J. Morales, R. Vázquez-Martín, A. Mandow, D. Morilla-Cabello, and A. García-Cerezo. The UMA-SAR Dataset: Multimodal Data Collection from a Ground Vehicle During Outdoor Disaster Response Training Exercises. The Inter-national Journal of Robotics Research , 40(6-7):835–847, 2021. doi: 10.1177/ 02783649211004959. [13] S. Sambolek and M. Ivašić-Kos. Search and Rescue Image Dataset for Person Detection - SARD, 2021. [14] Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 779–788, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.91. [15] Juan Terven, Diana-Margarita Córdova-Esparza, and Julio-Alejandro Romero-González. A Comprehensive Review of YOLO Architectures in Computer Vi-sion: From YOLOv1 to YOLOv8 and YOLO-NAS. Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction , 5(4):1680–1716, 2023. doi: 10.3390/make5040083. [16] W. Liu, D. Anguelov, D Erhan, C. Szegedy, S. Reed, C.Y Fu, and A.C. Berg. SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2016 , pages 21–37. Springer International Publishing, 2016. doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-319-46448-0\_2. [17] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik. Rich Feature Hierarchies for Accurate Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation. In 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 580–587, 2014. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2014.81. 30 [18] O. Hmidani and E. M. Ismaili Alaoui. A Comprehensive Survey of the R-CNN Family for Object Detection. In 2022 5th International Conference on Advanced Communication Technologies and Networking (CommNet) , pages 1– 6, 2022. doi: 10.1109/CommNet56067.2022.9993862. [19] S. Hasan, J. Joy, F. Ahsan, H. Khambaty, M. Agarwal, and J. Mounsef. AWater Behavior Dataset for an Image-Based Drowning Solution. In 2021 IEEE Green Energy and Smart Systems Conference (IGESSC) , pages 1–5, 2021. doi: 10.1109/IGESSC53124.2021.9618700. [20] D. Broyles, C. R. Hayner, and K. Leung. WiSARD: A Labeled Visual and Ther-mal Image Dataset for Wilderness Search and Rescue. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ In-ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 9467– 9474, 2022. doi: 10.1109/IROS47612.2022.9981298. [21] S. Sambolek and M. Ivasic-Kos. Automatic Person Detection in Search and Rescue Operations Using Deep CNN Detectors. IEEE Access , 9:37905–37922, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3063681. [22] I. Martinez-Alpiste, G. Golcarenarenji, Q. Wang, and J.M. Alcaraz-Calero. Search and Rescue Operation using UAVs: A Case Study. Expert Systems with Applications , 178:114937, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2021.114937. [23] P. Adarsh, P. Rathi, and M. Kumar. YOLO v3-Tiny: Object Detection and Recognition using one stage improved model. In 2020 6th International Confer-ence on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS) , pages 687–694, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ICACCS48705.2020.9074315. [24] Long Sha, Patrick Lucey, Stuart Morgan, Dave Pease, and Sridha Sridharan. Swimmer Localization from a Moving Camera. In 2013 International Con-ference on Digital Image Computing: Techniques and Applications (DICTA) ,Hobart, Australia, November 2013. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/dicta.2013.6691533. [25] Eleftherios Lygouras, Nicholas Santavas, Anastasios Taitzoglou, Konstantinos Tarchanidis, Athanasios Mitropoulos, and Antonios Gasteratos. Unsupervised Human Detection with an Embedded Vision System on a Fully Autonomous UAV for Search and Rescue Operations. Sensors , 19(16):3542, 2019. doi: 10. 3390/s19163542. [26] Y. Li, H. Huang, Q. Xie, L. Yao, and Q. Chen. Research on a Surface Defect Detection Algorithm Based on MobileNet-SSD. Applied Sciences , 8(9), 2018. doi: 10.3390/app8091678. [27] Eleftherios Lygouras and Antonios Gasteratos. A New Method to combine Detection and Tracking Algorithms for Fast and Accurate Human Localization in UAV-based SAR Operations. In 2020 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS) , pages 1688–1696, Athens, Greece, 2020. doi: 10. 1109/ICUAS48674.2020.9213873. 31 [28] Ross Girshick. Fast R-CNN. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Com-puter Vision (ICCV) , pages 1440–1448, Santiago, Chile, December 2015. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/iccv.2015.169. [29] Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. Mask R-CNN. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 2961–2969, Venice, Italy, Oct 2017. doi: 10.1109/iccv.2017.322. [30] Zifeng Wu, Chunhua Shen, and Anton van den Hengel. Wider or Deeper: Revisiting the ResNet Model for Visual Recognition. Pattern Recognition , 90: 119–133, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2019.01.006. [31] J. F. Henriques, R. Caseiro, P. Martins, and J. Batista. High-Speed Tracking with Kernelized Correlation Filters. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 37(03):583–596, mar 2015. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI. 2014.2345390. [32] N. Dalal and B. Triggs. Histograms of Oriented Gradients for Human Detection. In 2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05) , volume 1, pages 886–893, San Diego, California, 2005. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2005.177. [33] Martin van Buuren, Geert Jan Kommer, Rob van der Mei, and Sandjai Bhulai. A Simulation Model for Emergency Medical Services Call Centers. In 2015 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC) , pages 844–855, 2015. doi: 10.1109/ WSC.2015.7408221. [34] Mustafa Cicek, Sinan Pasli, Melih Imamoglu, Metin Yadigaroglu, Muhammed Fatih Beser, and Abdulkadir Gunduz. Simulation-Based Drone Assisted Search Operations in a River. Wilderness & Environmental Medicine , 33(3):311–317, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.wem.2022.05.006. PMID: 35843856. [35] Celia Seguin, Gilles Blaquière, Anderson Loundou, Pierre Michelet, and Thibaut Markarian. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (Drones) to Prevent Drown-ing. Resuscitation , 127:63–67, 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2018.04.005. [36] Sofia Schön. Model Fidelity in Mission Scenario Simulations for Systems of Systems: A Case Study of Maritime Search and Rescue . PhD thesis, Linkopings Universitet (Sweden), 2023. [37] Behrooz Ashrafi, Gibeom Kim, Masoud Naseri, Javad Barabady, Sushmit Dhar, Gyunyoung Heo, and Sejin Baek. An Agent-based Modelling Framework for Performance Assessment of Search and Rescue Operations in the Barents Sea. 

Safety in Extreme Environments , 6(3):183–200, September 2024. doi: 10.1007/ s42797-024-00101-2. [38] Wen-Chih Ho, Jian-Hung Shen, Chung-Ping Liu, and Yung-Wei Chen. Research on Optimal Model of Maritime Search and Rescue Route for Rescue of Multiple 32 Distress Targets. Journal of Marine Science and Engineering , 10(4):460, 2022. doi: 10.3390/jmse10040460. [39] B Lee and AP Teixeira. Simulation of Search and Rescue Operations of the Continental Coast of Portugal , volume 2, pages 213–221. CRC Press, 2022. doi: 10.1201/9781003320289-23. [40] Qing Yang and Meng Li. Information System Computer Dynamics Simulation of the Water Traffic Emergency Rescue by Vensim Software. In 2021 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Civil Aviation Safety and Information Technology (ICCASIT) , pages 614–620, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ICCASIT53235.2021.9633389. [41] Sonia Waharte and Niki Trigoni. Supporting Search and Rescue Operations with UAVs. In 2010 International Conference on Emerging Security Technolo-gies , pages 142–147, Canterbury, UK, 2010. doi: 10.1109/est.2010.31. [42] Ebtehal Turki Alotaibi, Shahad Saleh Alqefari, and Anis Koubaa. LSAR: Multi-UAV Collaboration for Search and Rescue Missions. IEEE Access , 7:55817– 55832, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2912306. [43] T. Schneidereit, S. Gohrenz, and M. Breuß. Object Detection Characteristics in a Learning Factory Environment using YOLOv8. In Kohei Arai, editor, 

Intelligent Systems and Applications , pages 288–308, Cham, 2025. Springer Nature Switzerland. [44] Jawad N Yasin, Sherif AS Mohamed, Mohammad-Hashem Haghbayan, Jukka Heikkonen, Hannu Tenhunen, and Juha Plosila. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs): Collision Avoidance Systems and Approaches. IEEE Access , 8:105139– 105155, 2020. doi: 10.1109/access.2020.3000064. [45] Jisu Kim, Sungjun Hong, Jeonghyun Baek, Euntai Kim, and Heejin Lee. Au-tonomous Vehicle Detection System using Visible and Infrared Camera. In 2012 12th International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems , pages 630– 634, Jeju, Korea (South), 2012. [46] Young K Kwag and Jung W Kang. Obstacle Awareness and Collision Avoidance Radar Sensor System for Low-Altitude Flying Smart UAV. In The 23rd Digital Avionics Systems Conference (IEEE Cat. No. 04CH37576) , volume 2, pages 12–D, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 2004. doi: 10.1109/DASC.2004.1390837. [47] Alexey Bochkovskiy. Yolo v4, v3 and v2 for Windows and Linux, n.d. URL 

https://github.com/AlexeyAB/darknet . (Accessed: 2025-10-01). [48] Joseph Redmon. Darknet: Open Source Neural Networks in C, 2013–2016. URL http://pjreddie.com/darknet/ . (Accessed: 2025-10-01). [49] Mohsen Khan Mohammadi, Toni Schneidereit, Ashkan Mansouri Yarahmadi, and Michael Breuß. Investigating Training Datasets of Real and Synthetic Images for Outdoor Swimmer Localisation with YOLO. AI , 5(2):576–593, 2024. doi: 10.3390/ai5020030. 33 [50] Mark Everingham, S. M. Eslami, Luc Gool, Christopher K. Williams, John Winn, and Andrew Zisserman. The Pascal Visual Object Classes Challenge: A Retrospective. Int. J. Comput. Vision , 111(1):98––136, jan 2015. doi: 10.1007/ s11263-014-0733-5. [51] Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement, 2018. [52] Chengyang Wang and Caiming Zhong. Adaptive Feature Pyramid Networks for Object Detection. IEEE Access , 9:107024–107032, 2021. doi: 10.1109/access. 2021.3100369. [53] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. In David Fleet, Tomas Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars, editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2014 , pages 740–755, Switzer-land, 2014. Springer International Publishing. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10602-1\ _48. [54] Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. YOLO9000: Better, Faster, Stronger. 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 6517–6525, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.690. [55] Glenn Jocher, Ayush Chaurasia, Alex Stoken, Jirka Borovec, NanoCode012, Yonghye Kwon, TaoXie, Kalen Michael, Jiacong Fang, Imyhxy, Lorna, Colin Wong, Zeng Yifu, Abhiram V, Diego Montes, Zhiqiang Wang, Cristi Fati, Je-bastin Nadar, Laughing, UnglvKitDe, Tkianai, YxNONG, Piotr Skalski, Adam Hogan, Max Strobel, Mrinal Jain, Lorenzo Mammana, and Xylieong. ultra-lytics/yolov5: v6.2 - YOLOv5 Classification Models, Apple M1, Reproducibil-ity, ClearML and Deci.ai integrations, August 2022. Zenodo; Provided by the SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System. [56] Glenn Jocher. YOLOv5 by Ultralytics, 2020. URL https://github.com/ ultralytics/yolov5 .[57] Chien-Yao Wang, Hong-Yuan Mark Liao, Yueh-Hua Wu, Ping-Yang Chen, Jun-Wei Hsieh, and I-Hau Yeh. CSPNet: A New Backbone that can Enhance Learning Capability of CNN. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) , Seattle, WA, USA, June 2020. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/cvprw50498.2020.00203. [58] Shu Liu, Lu Qi, Haifang Qin, Jianping Shi, and Jiaya Jia. Path Aggregation Network for Instance Segmentation. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , Salt Lake City, UT, USA, June 2018. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2018.00913. [59] Glenn Jocher, Ayush Chaurasia, and Jing Qiu. Ultralytics YOLO, January 2023. URL https://github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics . (Accessed: 2025-10-01). 34 [60] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Las Vegas, NV, USA, June 2016. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2016.90. [61] Chris Jay Hoofnagle, Bart van der Sloot, and Frederik Zuiderveen Borgesius. The European Union General Data Protection Regulation: What it is and what it means. SSRN Electronic Journal , 2018. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.3254511. [62] Sean Coughlin. Swimmers Dataset, 2021. URL https://www.kaggle.com/ datasets/seanmc4/swimmers . (Accessed: 2025-01-01). [63] Slavomira Schneidereit, Ashkan Mansouri Yarahmadi, Toni Schneidereit, Michael Breuß, and Marc Gebauer. YOLO-Based Object Detection in Industry 4.0 Fischertechnik Model Environment , pages 1––20. Springer Nature, Switzer-land, 2024. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-47724-9\_1. [64] Paul Sorensen and Richard Church. Integrating Expected Coverage and Local Reliability for Emergency Medical Services Location Problems. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences , 44(1):8–18, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.seps.2009.04.002. [65] Kanchala Sudtachat, Maria E Mayorga, and Laura A Mclay. A Nested-Compliance Table Policy for Emergency Medical Service Systems under Re-location. Omega , 58:154–168, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.omega.2015.06.001. [66] Lina Aboueljinane, Evren Sahin, and Zied Jemai. A Review on Simulation Models applied to Emergency Medical Service Operations. Computers & In-dustrial Engineering , 66(4):734–750, 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.cie.2013.09.017. [67] Sascha Zell, Toni Schneidereit, Armin Fügenschuh, and Michael Breuß. Ad-vanced Search and Rescue Operations for Drowning Swimmers using Au-tonomous Unmanned Aircraft Systems: Location Optimization, Flight Tra-jectory Planning and Image-based Localization, 2024. [68] Rafael Padilla, Sergio L. Netto, and Eduardo A. B. da Silva. A Survey on Per-formance Metrics for Object-Detection Algorithms. In 2020 International Con-ference on Systems, Signals and Image Processing (IWSSIP) , Niterói, Brazil, July 2020. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/iwssip48289.2020.9145130. [69] Andrew B. Watson. High Frame Rates and Human Vision: A View through the Window of Visibility. SMPTE Motion Imaging Journal , 122(2):18––32, March 2013. doi: 10.5594/j18266xy. [70] Ankur Handa, Richard A. Newcombe, Adrien Angeli, and Andrew J. Davison. Real-Time Camera Tracking: When is High Frame-Rate Best? In Computer Vision – ECCV 2012 , pages 222––235, Florence, Italy, 2012. Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-33786-4\_17. [71] Konrad Schindler and Luc van Gool. Action Snippets: How Many Frames does Human Action Recognition Require? In 2008 IEEE Conference on Computer 

35 Vision and Pattern Recognition , Anchorage, Alaska, USA, June 2008. IEEE. doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2008.4587730. [72] E. W. Dijkstra. A Note on two Problems in Connexion with Graphs. Nu-merische Mathematik , 1(1):269–271, 1959. doi: 10.1007/BF01386390. [73] Jukka Pappinen and Hilla Nordquist. Driving Speeds in Urgent and Non-urgent Ambulance Missions during Normal and Reduced Winter Speed Limit Periods—A Descriptive Study. Nursing Reports , 12(1):50–58, 2022. doi: 10. 3390/nursrep12010006. [74] Der-Tsai Lee. Proximity and Reachability in the Plane. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1978. [75] DIN Deutsches Institut für Normung e.V. DIN 14961:2025-09 – Boote für die Feuerwehr, 09 2025. URL https://www.dinmedia.de/de/norm/din-14961/ 392911277 . Beuth Verlag, Berlin. (Accessed: 2025-10-21). [76] Blick aktuell. Starkes Boot für starke Strömung, 09 2022. URL https://www.blick-aktuell.de/Berichte/ Starkes-Boot-fuer-starke-Stroemung-522733.html . (Accessed: 2025-10-21). 36